You are listening to radio lab radio from W.
N y. S. E. N. N. P. R.
All right. Okay, so let's just do the open. All right. Hey, I'm Jad Abumrad.
I'm Robert Krulwich. This is radio lab and today we're going to be talking,
well, let, let's do it this way. Which way I, uh,
I was at the 92nd street y in New York City, a big gathering spot for up, uh,
cool people with new books and that particular we is Richard Dawkins.
Richard,
don't you like him?
Make it so easy for him? I decided to begin.
This is a real problem for a lot of people by quoting him to him.
Um, you right. I Dunno if it's in this book or some other,
the total amount of suffering per year in the natural world is beyond all decent
contemplation during the minute that takes me to compose this sentence.
Thousands of animals are being eaten alive. Others are running for their lives,
whimpering with fear. Others are slowly being devoured from within,
by rasping parasites. Thousands of all kinds are dying of starvation,
thirst disease. It must be.
So if there's ever a time of plenty,
this very fact will automatically lead to an increase in population until the
natural state of starvation and misery is restored.
Who Darwin was worried by the same thing. I mean,
Darwin recognize the total horror of the suffering in nature was one of the
things that actually made him lose his faith.
But he also realized that it's not just a fact that it happens. It's,
it's intrinsic to natural selection that it must happen.
And when you look at a beautiful animal like a Cheetah that appears to be
beautifully designed for something like a cheater is amazingly well designed
apparently for catching gazelles and gazelles are amazingly well designed for
escaping from,
from Cheetahs that they are the end products of a sort of evolutionary arms race
in which thousands, millions of animals have died. The,
the shaping,
the carving of the shape of a cheetah or a gazelle has come about through
millions of unsuccessful gazelles being caught and the successful ones,
um, making it through, only to be caught later probably,
but after reproducing and passing on the genes that help them to escape.
So the sheer number of deaths that lie behind the sculpting of,
of these beautiful creatures is horrifying. And at the same time, it,
it's got a kind of savage beauty
[inaudible]
wow. Why do you blame this exactly? Well, because I was sitting there thinking,
I know cheetahs chasing eat antelopes but wasn't there a nice ones that went
over to the antelope and said, yeah, have a sandwich together.
And it maybe something about the Cheetah and the had something to do with an act
of kindness,
thinking that maybe it's not just meanness that can sculpt,
that maybe niceness can sculpt too.
The exact
niceness as a, as a
[inaudible] niceness as a scout.
I want listen to that show. [inaudible]
wait a second. We are that show. We should do it then.
Let's do it today on radio lab.
Goodness,
selflessness, altruism. If the world is so cruel, how do you account for it?
How should we think about it? And when you do see generosity,
how do you know what's really generous?
[inaudible].
All right, so we're going to start the show, uh,
with a story that sort of embodies the last question.
You asked about a guy named George Price,
who is a mathematician we never heard of until our producer Lynn Levy told us
about him. She heard about it from an author, Oren Harman,
who wrote a book called the price as in George Price of altruistic around,
you know, this is a high school photo. So, okay,
so the people on the radio can't see the picture.
So describe what he looks like. Well, I tell you, he looks a bit like sort of a,
some kind of Scandinavian prince in the 17th century.
Good looking guy. Totally. Um, definitely something about this guy's eyes.
His eyes. Yeah. This was described to me by a number of people who knew him.
He had a gaze that you sort of walked away from at your own peril.
There was something that, you know, he, he sort of new things.
You could start George's story anywhere.
But let's start in 1943 today,
George graduates from college and he's this very kinetic kind of guy.
Really Athletic.
You'd swim in the surf and he did a lot of rock climbing and by all accounts he
was incredibly brilliant and right after college he starts to kind of bounce
through history. He was all over the place.
First place he ends up is the Manhattan project on uranium in Richmond.
So he was working as a chemist on the atom bomb when he was done with that.
After a couple of years he made a 90 degree turn and started working at bell
labs on transistor research.
Solved some very basic problems there and then disappeared like a phantom.
Started working at a medical center on oncology research, meaning cancer.
And I remember going to his lab playing hide and seek all these bottles and tips
to the, by this time George had a wife and two kids.
You look under the microscope, it's slides of blood [inaudible] and Kathleen,
but you never really saw them that much work 56 hours straight without sleeping
on Benzos.
I remember he was always stuff like that. Gone a lot. Mm.
When the kids were still pretty young, we were like five and six.
He left his family.
Yeah.
Just left turn another 90 degree corner and began working on computer aided
design. In fact, he invented computer aided design.
He was firing in all directions.
What do you think was driving him to keep moving from thing to thing?
He just wanted to succeed at any cost.
It made no difference in what field.
And at one point in time he was corresponding with about five Nobel laureates
each in a different field.
He wanted to have one great discovery that would make his name.
So that's, that's George. Wow. Quite a guy. Very interesting guy.
So what happens next? So next what happens is he gets on a boat and he,
he goes to London. When was this by the way? It's November,
1967 and uh, in London, that's where things, um,
for our purposes start to really happen by what happens in London. Well,
he starts looking for this question. He goes from library to library.
There are 13 libraries that he would hang out at and the question that he finds
for himself, which is weird considering his personal history, um,
is
why family?
Like why do people have family? Like, why do families stick together?
There are a lot of sort of dynamics within the family where it would make more
sense for an individual to sort of break out.
No, go it alone. I'm like, he had and yet family persists
and there should be a good reason for it.
He even wrote about the question to his daughter, do Kathleen?
My big paper will be on the evolutionary origin of the human family.
And most species,
the father just mates with the mother and she does all the childbearing herself.
But in the human species,
the dominant pattern has involved care by adult males toward their own children.
Why did I species evolve this way?
Yeah,
it just brings back what kind of a father our father was towards us and
basically there was kind of this benign neglect [inaudible]
okay,
but this question, why family was only the beginning, uh,
why family led him to a bigger question,
which is why does anybody help anybody? Huh?
Well, what do you mean? If you think about, um, Darwin's idea,
survival of the fittest. [inaudible] think about what that really means.
It means if you are a creature, you have two big important jobs,
you gotta to survive and you gotta be fit, right? Whatever that means.
Fitness really means how many babies can you make,
how many babies are you making? And so if you do some stupid, you know,
harebrained thing, that means you can't stay alive and or you can't make babies.
That doesn't make any sense. Right? And yet, wherever you look in,
you see creatures
doing this from bacteria to insects, birds,
[inaudible] ants and wasps. Fish. I'll give you an example.
There's a species of Amoeba called Disco Tealium, discoid, IOM Wa,
which usually the Amiibo sort of lives on its own.
It's a single celled organism in the forest. But when resources are low,
what it does is it sends out this chemical signal and all the other Amoeba who
are also single cell,
they start sending out signals and they start sort of crawling until they all
meet and they become one slug, which is now a single organism.
And the slug begins to sort of move along until it finds a place that's windy
and sunny, at which point it stops.
And the top 20% of the slug,
the top 20% Amoeba in the head of the slug begin to create out of their own body
a star
which hardens
and they die while doing so.
But the stock allows the bottom 80% to climb up the stock and to create an orb
at the top of the stock. And from there all the Amoeba that aren't, you know,
dead. They can catch a wind
to better pastures. It's like a dandelion.
So what's happened is that the top 20% have really sacrificed themselves for the
back 80% and that's an Amoeba. So he figured what the hell is happening here?
This was a great mystery to Darwin. And Darwin said,
this is in fact the greatest mystery in the greatest riddle.
And if I can't answer it, then my theory isn't worth anything.
And for a hundred years when people talked about evolution, this thing,
altruism is the elephant in the room.
So we were curious about this. How might you take this elephant,
this niceness thing that seems to be everywhere and shove it back into the mean
old theory of evolution? It's gotta be a way. So we called up Carl Zimmer,
who's a journalist we have on the show quite often,
writes a lot about evolution.
And he told us in the 1960s just as George Price was starting to ask these
questions, some scientists came up with a new way of thinking about altruism.
A thought experiment, which you ran us through. Okay. So, okay,
so, so Robert, do you have siblings? I have a sister. Okay, you have a sister,
Sarah. Okay, let's just imagine that, um,
you guys are like home from college saying okay.
And there's a flood at the crawl, which manner
the water's flooding around and you can see that your sister is about to die.
If you save your sister's life and dying the process, your genes,
Robert Krulwich, his genes are gone. Yup. Yup.
Right? This is the problem. Yes. But you,
your sister have the same parents? Yes. Okay.
So your sister has 50% of your genes. So if I rescue her,
then half my genes survive. Right? 50% move on.
Now if you had a sister and a brother
and you saved them both lead each have 50% so it's a wash and so it's
effectively, it's like it's like saving Robert College in his entirety.
Mathematically speaking, mathematically speaking. Right.
Can you do this with cousins? Yeah,
actually if you step it back to cousins,
what percentages are, that's a quarter.
In the case of the grist cousins that is,
it's an eighth so we have to have eight covers cousins to equal my full genome.
Right? Yeah. Do you have that many?
I have 32 third cousins and that's why I always round them up at a Rodeo every
year and you place them all together.
You guys stay here in case something happens to me, but here's what I don't get.
Like how does this actually operate?
Like Robert's not going to sit there while the manor is flooding and be like,
well, let's see,
I have a cousin that's an eighth then a second cousin that the 32nd no,
you understand the math has already been done. The math is already,
the math has been done by evolution on genes and those are the jeans you got.
Oh, so you're saying that the evolution is turned the math into an instinct.
Yeah. You got it.
I don't think I get it. Like so what is the instinct here? The,
I know I want to save my sister. Yeah, let's, so here's how I understand it.
Since this has half your genes and since second cousin only has a 32nd,
theoretically your instinct to save your cyst should be 16 times stronger than
your instinct. No, that's actually roughly proportionally. Correct.
But keep in mind, this was just an idea.
It's just a thought experiment until our Guy George Price comes along and writes
an equation,
which shows mathematically how an instinct like this could evolve. Very
powerful. Okay. So well do you want me to just read the letters? Yeah.
What is the equation? What equals what? Okay. Okay. So it's a, um,
w times Delta z equals the covariance of w I come a Z,
I plus e, we call it e w, I, Delta, Z, I,
oh, of course. Yeah. There you go.
Well complicated. I mean, it was simple a second ago. Yeah,
it sounds a little complicated. He's not just dealing with like a simple setup.
It's like he's got a traits and how they affect the different groups and how
things change over time. So it's a big, there's a lot going on in there. Okay.
Yeah. All right.
Do you understand what you just said? Not so here.
This is a really interesting letter, which you should read it.
When he did write the equation,
he walked off the street into the university and University College of the
University of London in London. Complete unknown. Why? Just moved from America.
No one knew who, who he was.
I went to talk to a professor Smith and he showed equation to the professor and
said, is this new?
I felt sure that someone must've discovered it before the professor looked at it
and after a very, very short amount of minutes,
gave him an honorary professorship keys and the keys to,
to an office,
one of the best genetics departments in the world.
So George is sitting in his office,
which by the way is on the site of Darwin's old house. Whoa. Yeah. And uh,
he's made this big discovery and he's thinking, thank you.
Thank you.
Thinking philosophically that what it all meant.
Thank you. Thank you.
If I can write a formal mathematical treatment of the evolution of a trait like
altruism,
what it means about the trade is that that the trait is never really purely
altruistic.
Mm.
If making a sacrifice helps me in the end or helps my genes sort of like
selfishness in the skies. Yeah. If that's true,
the world is a terrible place.
[inaudible]
because it means that there's no Tucson,
there could never be true selflessness in the world.
My math means that there cannot ever be true selflessness
and I can't accept a world like that.
Why could he suddenly not accept a world like that? I, yeah. I don't know. Um,
or other things it might be because precisely because he had been so selfish for
most of his life.
[inaudible]
and so he decided in his own life to embark on a program of radical altruism
that would prove that there was true selflessness in school and that's what led
him to the streets of London
in search of homeless people.
There were licks down and outs and he began by sort of just walking up to them
introducing himself. Hello, my name is George. What's your name?
How can I help you? It's random people on the street. Yeah,
everywhere I go I keep running into down and out alcoholics to whom I give,
when I have anything and with whom I sit and drink from their bottle.
If they offer me a drink, buy people's sandwiches or give them a few pounds,
whether it's by giving them money, cleaning a filthy kitchen,
and then got them Lord bigger started giving out keys to his place,
dividing these guys into his home. People were coming and going.
He was giving them food clothes and after a few months of charity like that,
he was out of money.
There was one letter that he had written to John Maynard Smith,
another great biologist of the era which said, John,
I'm down to my last 15 p and I can't wait to get rid of the f the last 15 huh?
He thought he was proving his equation wrong.
So by getting poorer and poorer and giving away all this stuff,
he was somehow negating the thing.
His math seemed to say was inevitable. The selfish instinct. Yeah. You know,
he had self-preservation
instinct and he was gonna fight the self preservation instinct and,
and he was gonna win to sort of beat the mathematics that he himself had
written. So he was approaching it almost like a, like a math proof. Yeah.
Just the red one that you'd be talking [inaudible] when you ran out of money,
George moved out of his apartment and into this abandoned house in a part of
London called Tomer Square. Which one does the volume for my headphone,
which is where he met Sylvia. It was rough. They were just,
cause they were just poles holding the walls up some, some places at balls.
She was a young artist also squatting at the time and the buildings are
crumbling, you know, people had made,
makes shift staircases and George had like a room, well,
a few clothes on the floor. Not much, but you know,
you could see he was always thinking he would go around asking other people,
does anybody have shoes? They don't want seven, seven needs a pair of shoes.
You know, that would be part of it,
but it might also be like if somebody was sick,
getting them to a doctor because if you didn't, if you were homeless,
it's very hard to have a doctor. But like I said,
all this is going on at the same time,
he was getting thinner and thinner,
send the neck and then these clothes, it just hung around him.
Hmm. He began writing letters to his daughters apologizing.
[inaudible] dear Henri, sorry,
I deserted you like that and I'm sorry it was such a poor father to you. Yeah,
I've been a terrible father. Looking at your picture now,
it makes me wish I could do it all over again.
Maybe where I come into the picture is to leave you. Okay.
He wanted to begin again. She says, George asked her to marry him over and over.
First I thought it was some kind of a joke kind of Saint George.
We can't get met, you know,
she said no each time and that at a certain point he gave up.
It's hard to really, really remember,
but it was cold or is it as winter came on,
um,
you wouldn't see George's often. He became quieter. I think.
I just remember, um,
I'm quieter.
One morning this guy that was sharing a squat with George [inaudible] name is
[inaudible]. He was heading out the door, he found beneath the door. Um,
as he was going out of the building,
he found beneath the door a letter and since they were living in a squat,
he was afraid that this was some kind of eviction notice or something like that.
He didn't read English, he couldn't read English.
So he ran up the stairs and knocked on George's door because George was the only
one who could read English. And when he knocked the door,
sort of kind of went in a bit and he could see in the aperture that there was
blood all over the linoleum. [inaudible]
had enough of an opening.
He could see that George was sitting there with no blood left in his body.
He killed himself. Yeah, he took a pair of, um,
of scissors and cut through his carotid artery, which is a very,
very sort of terrible death.
[inaudible]
Oh
thanks to producer Lynn Levy.
For more on George Price, be sure to read Oren Harmon's book,
the price of Altruism and thanks also to Carl Zimmer.
His latest is microcosm. We'll be right back.
Hi,
this is Ann Marie Price is Kathleen cray radio that is funded in part by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information about Sloan at www dot [inaudible] dot org this is Oren
calling. Radiolab is produced by W N Y,
Z and distributed by NPR. This is Carl Zimmer. Bye.
Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Squarespace.
The simplest way to create a website this new year.
Make your next move with Squarespace,
whether that's starting a business or launching a passion project,
no matter what your goals are.
Squarespace's award winning templates can help you present your ideas to the
world.
Beautifully use offer code Radiolab for 10% off your first purchase of a
Squarespace domain or website, squarespace.com make your next move.
Make your next website.
Hey, this is radio lamb. I'm Jad Abumrad. I am Robert Krulwich.
Our topic today is goodness, goodness, selflessness. So we've done the math.
I the math leaves me a little on the cold side. Why did your why is,
you know what? Forget the math. Forget it. Let's, yeah,
let's go to the people who do the deeds.
You have people who do amazingly brave and heroic things. Yeah,
no math required and maybe find out,
I don't know what makes them different than the rest of us. Yeah.
That question. Let us
to a guy named Walter Rick Calcium [inaudible] and
I am the executive director and secretary of the Carnegie Hero Fund Commission.
Cool. Well thanks for doing this. Okay.
Can you just give us a little background on the hero fund?
What is the Carnegie Hero Fund?
A Carnegie Hero Fund is a private operating foundation that was established by
Andrew Carnegie in 1904 and what we do is recognize civilian heroism throughout
the United States and Canada by giving an award called the Carnegie Medal and
the company, the Carnegie Medal is a financial grant. How much a?
Currently the amount is $5,000 wow. And how do you guys choose your heroes?
We judged the heroic acts against a list of,
so then you have to have some kind of definition of hero,
which includes some and excludes others. Yes. Perfect. Basic definition,
which is a civilian one meaning no military who voluntarily to leaves a point of
safety three to risk his own life or her own life or to an extraordinary degree
to save or to attempt to save the life of another human six.
How about seven y can you hear? Can you read that one more time? Okay.
I wasn't reading that just came from memory.
So what is it that happens in a person's mind at that pivotal moment when they
decide to voluntarily,
voluntarily leave a point of safety and seen their life to an extraordinary
degree to save the life of another human? That's what we wanted to know.
Should we just jump in? Okay.
So the first one we have on our list is a Laura Shrek. Okay.
That's file number seven three five four six and the award number is 8,005
I am Laura shrike. I'm from Matt Toon,
Illinois and I currently live in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Oh Wow. Laura spoke with our producer Tim Howard. Okay,
so we're going back a little bit here. Yeah,
15 years back in the mid Nineties 1995 to 21 year old college students
and I was driving through the country and I saw a woman getting mauled by a bull
and a pasture,
so she stopped to see what was going on,
jumped out and started yelling at her to see what I could do.
The woman was on the ground and the bull was 50 pound Jersey bull tossing her in
the air and back on the ground. Wow. She was clearly struggling.
And where were you? I was right on the other side of the fence,
but the fence was electric.
So here's the moment that we find fascinating. At this point,
Laura can either go forward through thousands of volts of electricity toward an
angry ball that will likely mall her to, or
mm.
She can stay safe.
No,
I wouldn't have just climbed through the fence
and I don't remember ever feeling the electricity.
She says by the time she got through crazily enough,
neighbor had shown up and threw her a piece of pipe maybe about two feet long or
she approached the woman who was still conscious the whole time she's yelling at
me. Hit the ball in the face as hard as you can and don't stop.
So Miss Shriek went up to the bowl and uh,
repeatedly. Yeah,
she's two foot, one foot tubing.
I think it distracted the bowl and not where she was able to get out from under
him.
And as soon as we were outside the fence looking back into the pastor and the
bull was literally right there at the fence,
kick the ground a few times and snorted. He was not happy. He was not happy.
Okay.
To our question, when you were at that fence
and you had the choice either stay put or to go through it,
what was going through your mind? W was there a calculation there?
No, I can't really say that. I mean
you didn't weigh your options or anything like that?
I did not know. It was just, here's the problem,
here's what I need to do, and something needed to happen. Huh?
So there is no choice moment?
Not that I recall, no.
If nobody came to this woman's rescue, she would die. Unfortunately.
This is the usual explanation, says Walter lobular. No explanation.
Like I couldn't stand there and not do anything. I would,
I was compelled to act.
I didn't really take the time to think about what else could happen.
I can't say I ever really thought about loan life at that time.
I think we just jumped ahead because we thought we'd try again.
That's the voice of the next Carnegie Hero that, uh, Walter told us about.
Yeah. William David Pennell, Ames William Pannell wife,
who is the 8362nd person to receive the Carnegie Medal.
I'm pretty sure Lynn Levy tracked him down. Bill, can you hear me? Yeah,
I can hear you.
William. David Pennell was 37 years old at the time of his heroic act.
Was It 1999? Yes. I was, uh, early in the morning. It was like [inaudible]
3:19 AM in a small town near Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Monongahela, Pennsylvania.
Yeah, we was in bed sleeping and my wife heard a lot crash.
I actually didn't hear it when a dog
my one dog was carrying on. So right away I run down there.
Mr Pennell went outside his house. There was a very bad automobile accident,
a car crashed head on until utility [inaudible]
cool blames was like rippling the windshield out from under the hood.
[inaudible] responded to the scene wearing only sweatpants,
no shoes or sharp or nothing on their chest and their foot.
So here we are, bill standing in front of this ball of fire.
There are three drunk teenagers inside that car though he doesn't know it can
either a do nothing.
Ruby go in brew the driver's door
and it's a big fella slopped out the door.
So I reached in and grabbed the whole of them around the chest and pulled him
from the driver's seat out to the ground. Meantime, the car was just like blazer
and my neighbor was there. She was hollering, there's more of them in there.
So I run back to the VF and we found that the front seat passenger was trapped
in the wreckage. I finally got him loose and pulled him out.
Apparently Mr panel was aware that the third person was in the car 30 on man and
Mr Pennell entered the car third time.
By then it was tires blowing flames in front to about three feet above the car.
His roof interior,
like the headline or at the car and stuff was stripping like plastic Donald.
My back. Huh? I mean, I'm in there screaming, you know,
somebody give me hand in here,
but nobody, nobody would help. And uh,
I reached in and grabbed the hold of the kid who was in the back by the scruff
of the neck and pulled him out.
All right, so when you are coming out of your house and you looking at that car,
what was going through your head?
Well, just trying to try to help. I mean, I, I,
I did what any normal person would do. I mean, you know,
I just kept saying this to somebody whose kid, you know what I mean?
It's a time my daughter was like 16 and I'm saying to myself, you know,
if something, God forbid, whatever happened to her,
that I would hope someone would be there to help.
Do you ever talk to your neighbors and ask them why they didn't come in there?
Uh, you know what, that's funny you brought that up because, no, I've never,
never brought it up. Never brought it up. [inaudible] I dunno. I guess,
uh, maybe I probably wouldn't like their answer. I don't know.
I don't know why. I've never asked him about
what do you think is the difference between you and those other people who just
sort of stood by?
Uh, I, I couldn't answer that. I couldn't answer that.
So our bull girl, she didn't know
this guy didn't really know either.
Somebody must be able to tell us something about what they were thinking at that
moment that allowed them, that gave them the courage to do what they did.
I can't give you a definite answer as to what propels people to do this. No,
but we took one more shot with Walter and he told us about a case that of all
the cases he's heard, and this is the one that puzzles him the most,
the case of Wesley James Autry,
a construction worker from a New York 50 year old man who did jump into the
track that in a subway station to remove a fellow,
a young man who had fallen onto the track.
The gentleman was a six foot 280 pounds. He was,
he was in ERT and yet Mr Autry persisted despite the fact that a train was
coming. There would come a point then, let's, at least in my estimation,
where you would have to say,
I have to get out of here because I'm going to be killed on, I'm not suicidal,
but Mr Autry didn't think that way. He and I parked in this in this manner.
What he did was he lay at top the victim between the rails while the train
passed over them in the farthest reaches of my imagination,
I can see myself jumping onto a subway track to attempt the rescue.
What I can't see myself doing is lying at top,
the victim while the train passes over me.
[inaudible]
making this story even more nuts.
When we finally met up with Wesley,
Audrey on the platform where this incident happened under 35th and Broadway,
he explained to us that his daughters had been with him. Okay.
And uh, how old are your daughters at that time?
My daughter was four and six. And this, this them there.
Oh Shit. This picture, oh my God, super cute.
The one behind me is Shuki in this, the baby Sashi.
So when they're standing there and this guy starts convulsing and then
eventually falls off the platform onto the tracks, right as a train is coming,
his choice is pretty stark. In order to say this complete stranger,
he's got to leave his daughters behind potentially without a dad
and had him seeking and going into another seizure. Well,
some strange reason a boys out of nowhere that don't worry about your own new
worry about your daughters. You can do this.
So he jumps runs to the guy. Is he conscious? No,
no. Tries to grab the guy's hand and he's started my grab. This hand will slip,
applied in a, he slipped. I look up, the train is getting close.
I grab his hand again. We'll slip apart just riding the skulls up, 50 feet,
20 feet,
10 feet and then it's right there and all he can do his [inaudible] wrap the
guy,
get them in a bear hug and flattened his body against the guy as much as he can.
The first train car,
just greys my cats train car went right over it.
Train, came to a stop quoted, five calls passed over us.
I looked them in the eyes. Excuse me, you seem to have a seizure or something.
I don't know you, you don't know me.
So I just kept talking to him until he came through and he was like, well,
we have like, we're looking for training. He said, well, who are you? I said,
I came down to save your life. So he kept asking me, are we dead or when heaven,
I gave him a slight pinch on his own. He's like, oh, just I see you.
You are very much alive. Have you,
did you ever ask yourself at this point like what am I doing here? He asked it.
What am I doing here? What about you, your mom? I can hear the two ladies.
We had my daughter standing, the man between their legs.
I can hear my daughter screaming. So when that train come to a stop, uh,
I yelled up from underneath the train. Excuse me, I'm the father. We're okay.
I just want to let my daughters know that,
that I'm okay because I know that they are worried about me.
Everybody started clapping. Can I ask you a question?
So it's the point at which you said you heard a voice. Yes.
That said I can do this. I can do this. What's what,
what is amazing to me?
Is it you left your daughters right here and died after a guy you don't know he
was a stranger, a total stranger. But you know what? The mission wasn't calm,
completed. I was chose by that. You felt chose like you were cheating.
I felt like I was the chosen for a religious person though.
I would wonder why me? Well, you know what, uh,
maybe 20 years ago I was supposed to be at a certain point
and then he explained to us exactly why he had jumped.
He was the one guy who could, he said right before his feet left the platform,
this one specific moment from his life flashed
mind. This thing that happened, you know,
I had a gun pool to my temple, but you, it was a misfire. So you know,
a gun was put to your head and you missing, so you are almost dead for a second.
Those dead, you know, so you think you might've been spared for a period?
I was spared for a reason. After that moment,
he says when the gun went click and he didn't die,
he always wondered why had God spared him that moment until he was on the
platform and he saw the guy fall off. He says, then he knew,
this is why I can do this. It's just I can do this. I can do this.
That voice, when that boy said that you're going to be okay.
I knew everything was gonna work out,
you know? And I think at the end of the day, what's that happen?
I don't think that there's an answer to the question we asked.
I don't really hear a question. Why were you a hero?
I don't think that any three of these here.
I mean the last one had the longest explanation.
He had been selected for some purpose,
but does he know why he was not a clue?
A CIA guy number three gives me something. What does he give you? Okay,
so the first two, right? They have no idea. None,
so there's just something in them that made them act began.
Number three is talking about circumstances.
The world prepared him for that moment. Serendipity, so it makes me think,
well, what if circumstances are just right? Maybe any of us could do that.
I'll get, I'll get a middle man. He, he used to say to me all the time, he says,
how did you manage to do that up? Or how did you manage her pulling kids out?
I don't know if I could done that. I said, well, you know what?
Don't say you wouldn't do this or you wouldn't do that to you're put in that
situation. In fact, when we asked Walter,
how many nominations do you get a year, are they hard to find?
No, they are not hard at all to find a,
we are fortunate to be living in a society regardless of what you hear
elsewhere.
We are fortunate to be living in a society where people do look out for others,
even strangers.
He told us they've even had to up their guidelines to make it harder to win
simply because of the vast number for road deeds that, uh,
happen in day to day life.
Okay.
Hey there. This is [inaudible] calling from London, England.
Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org oh,
that's a bit of a tongue twister.
Hey, this is Radiolab. I'm Jad Abumrad. I'm Robert Krulwich.
Oh yes. Would you like to say our topic? Robert? Our topic today is goodness,
niceness or may altruism. Yep. Thus far,
we've met a couple of folks,
individuals who have struggled with altruism in some way. No.
We're going to sort of pull back and go from specifics to grand global strategy.
Yes. Hello. Hello, hello. And we're going to tell you really cool story.
We think the begins with this guy. My name is Robert Axelrod.
I'm the Walgreen professor for the study of human understanding and the
Department of Political Science and the Ford School of public policy of the
University of Michigan.
I know that's a mouth that was like your dean was like,
well you know,
you could just say I'm a professor of public policy and political science or
something. But before he was all of that extra road when he was in high school,
he was one of those guys who just loved computers. Well, yes, in 59,
1960 I hung around the Northwestern university computer center.
59 60.
So what were those large pieces of furniture in the building?
They were, in fact, the hall campus had one computer and uh, they,
let me use it for 15 minutes here in 15 minutes there.
And what would you do with you with the computer?
What I did was I did a very simple computer simulation of hypothetical life
forms and environments for science project. Really? Yeah.
You're a pre geek is what you are. Yes. The word had been invented.
I can't think you could say that.
But then in 1962 when actual robbers down in a computer basement,
I got somewhere all over the world.
Everybody else was watching one of the great dramas in modern times.
Hello telethons
unfolding the Cuban missile crisis
the past week.
Unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive
missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island.
And that's what rod started thinking about, the dilemma we were in. Well,
each side wants to spend more money buying missiles and things. You know,
we could build more bombs, but then they could build more bombs.
It would be better if they would both stop. But if we stop and they don't,
that'd be bad. Very bad. Yeah. And so I was interested in what's the,
what were the conditions that would allow people to get out of this problem?
And then he starts thinking, well wait,
maybe I could use my computer to help me figure out what's a good strategy for
this. For something like the Cuban missile crisis. Well, yes. Right.
And what made you think that computers could help with that? Well,
I came across a simple game called the prisoners to Atlanta.
No, it's from the window. Okay.
So the prisoner's dilemma is a very famous thought experiment.
It's a little tricky to describe, but I got a friend of mine, Andrew Zali,
who's written about the prisoner's dilemma in an upcoming book, resilience,
the science of why things bounce back. I got him to lay it out for me.
What is the prisoners in love, Matt?
So imagine that two bank robbers are hanging out across the street from the
first national bank and uh, the police pick them up.
They've received a tip that these two guys are about to rob the bank. Get it.
Yup. So the cops take these two guys back to the station,
do the whole law and order thing, put them in different rooms.
They walk into each one, let's call them lucky and Joe.
And they say to lucky,
we have enough to make sure that you go away for a six month sentence.
But this is not really what the cops want.
They want a longer sentence for one of these guys.
And so they make lucky and offer.
If you lucky rat out Joe and Joe doesn't say anything,
you will go free and Joe will go to jail for 10 years.
If the reverse happens, meaning if you say nothing and Joe Rats you out,
you're going to jail for 10 years and he's going to walk free.
If you both end up ratting on each other, you both get five, five years.
Whereas if you both keep your mouth shut,
you're each going to jail for six months for loitering.
Just somehow if lucky and Joe could talk to each other,
they both say don't speak. Absolutely.
But the big problem that lucky and Joe have is they can't talk to each other.
All right, so you're lucky. Okay. What do you do? Do you rat Joe out or no?
Do I know this guy? Huh?
At all? I mean you met for this one job,
but tomorrow you'll never see him again. Ever. Ever. Well, if I,
if I knew him and I could trust him, then I think I know what I would do.
But if keep your mouth shut, I wouldn't get six months.
He'd keep his mouth shut. It would be a sweet thing indeed. But see,
since I don't, no matter what, what would happen if he rats me out?
You'd go to jail for 10 years. He'd go freed bastard 10 years.
Yeah,
but if I read him out in the worst I get is five years or you know,
I go way free. I'm totally free. Do it. I guess say what's in your head.
I'm going to, I'm throwing him under the bus. Yes.
I wonder what's his name again? Joe. Joe. He's already gone.
Excuse me. Memory of your dad.
Jimmy. Joe. So you see in this type of scenario where you don't know the guy,
you have have very strong incentive to rack the other guy out or as the social
scientists would say to defect. That's right. If you play it only once,
if you only meet somebody once, whatever the other guy does,
you're better off defecting against them. Just here on out.
Whenever you hear the word defect, know that it means screw the other guy over.
But the f the really interesting stuff happens if you play over and over again.
If you're going to meet the same people again because now you're thinking,
should I help this guy out the next time? If he screwed me, should I say, screw
him up? This secret whip, extraordinary build up of communist missiles.
What do you do? You want to cooperate, but you don't want to get screwed,
which cannot be accepted by this country. Right. You know,
these kind of thoughts were paramount in those days because the prisoner's
dilemma was being played between the two superpowers.
This is our friend Steve Strogatz,
the Cornell mathematician who says at that time, low kinds of folks,
political scientists and economists and psychologists,
mathematicians were writing papers about the prisoner's dilemma.
We have a really in thinking, come on,
we've got to be able to win this game if we're going to play against the
Russians and we have to do it. Right. Exactly.
But there was no consensus on the best way to do it,
and so I was interested in what's a, what's a good strategy for this?
And that's when Robert Axelrod's sitting down there in the basement somewhere in
the Midwest with the big, that's when
he had his idea. His approach,
which was really novel at the time,
was to conduct a computer tournament. The computer terminal.
Yeah.
Invite the people that had come up with these different ideas to play with each
other. In other words, what he said is, uh, all right, Mr DWIs guy. You know,
you've written so-and-so many articles on the prisoner's dilemma.
You think you understand it.
How about joining this tournament where you have to submit a program that will
play prisoner's dilemma against programs submitted by the other experts.
We'll have a round Robin, right?
Try these different programs against each other.
So all these computer guys are brought to Caesar's palace in Las Vegas.
I wear Tuxedos. And they all sat down at the table. No, it's a nice image.
But what really happened was everyone submitted their programs to axle Rod.
They would mail their entries to me, but there was a trophy.
There wasn't a TOEFL. So I wrote to people and I said, if you win,
I'll send you a trophy.
Know little plaque that says you won the computer tournament. Yeah. Okay.
So here's the deal.
Every program will play every other program 200 times.
There will be points in each round and then actual rod will total the scores and
see what actually works by which he means in the long run.
Even if you lose some rounds here in the air,
one of these strategies is going to beat all the others.
Meaning it'll let you survive. Maybe even prosper.
That's the game. That's right. And uh,
can you introduce us to some of the contestants? Yeah.
So there was one program called massive retaliatory strike and the first move it
just cooperates. But then as soon as the other program doesn't cooperate,
it would then retaliate for the rest of the [inaudible].
Yes.
Sorry man, you blew it and never trust you again. Yeah. That's it for you.
This is like the way my wife was,
whenever a guy in her earlier life stood her up, that was it. Game over.
But there were also some trickier program.
I mean some crafty ones try to make a model of the opponent,
like you mentioned one that was called Tester, so tester would,
would see what you were like. It would start by being mean
and then
if you start retaliating, it backs off and says, you know, Ho chill.
It's okay man. And you know,
and then starts cooperating for awhile until it throws in another.
Yes. The past.
The other guy goes after all, it's called Tester. Yeah.
So test your guys kind of designed to see how much it can get away with. I mean,
it sounds kind of sensible in a way. I mean mean well, but if you see,
if you think about what happens if these two players play each other,
if tester plays massive retaliation 200 times,
pretty soon the tester will defect
[inaudible]
and then massive retaliation. Right.
Never cooperate again. You, it's true. Let's go
back to what I do very badly,
both of them. When you're sitting
there,
did you have a hunch as to which would be the most successful program or were
you
well, I didn't know and which is why I wanted to do it. Uh, but I did have a,
a hunch that, you know,
thousands or tens of thousands of lines of code would be needed to have a pretty
competent program.
So when the mailman delivers the fattest envelope to your house, he's like,
this could be the one they have. Well, yes. Right. Um,
now it didn't turn out that way
when it was all said and done when he loaded all the programs into the computer,
when it all played each other 200 times the program, that one
[inaudible]
it's really two lines of code. Two lines of code. Yeah. It's got a simple name.
It's called tit for tat first line of Code B. Nice.
Nice. Yeah. Nice. Nice. As a technical word in this game.
Nice means I never am nasty first.
And after that second line of code,
it just does what the other player did on the previous move.
Hmm.
So if the other player has just cooperated, it'll cooperate.
And if the other player has just defected, it'll defect
it retaliates on the next move. Couldn't be clearer. On the other hand,
it only retaliates that one time. I mean, unless provoked further, it does.
It's retaliation and now bygones be bygones. And that's it.
So how exactly did it win? I mean, can you give us a sense of,
of why it one? Okay, so let's suppose I'm here.
Let's take an extreme case of um, some very simple programs.
One of them I'll call Jesus
for the sake of argument. Let's think of her name. The Jesus Program
cooperates on every turn that is, it's always, it's always, you know, good.
Yeah. So the Jesus program is a simple algorithm that says, always be good.
Good, good, good, good, good. That's right.
And let's say the other program is the Lucifer program, which um,
no matter what always
[inaudible] is bad. Okay. These are your two extremes. [inaudible] from,
of course, most programs and most people fall somewhere in the middle, right?
But in TIF attack, you've got a strategy that can swing both ways. For instance,
with Jesus,
tit for tat starts by cooperating as does Jesus.
Oh.
And then they're going to keep cooperating
[inaudible]
for the whole 200 rounds, which is, you know, good.
But now let's suppose it plays Lucifer where there's no chance to cooperate.
The says Steve Tit for tat just plays good defense.
So when Lucifer does his thing, tiff atop retaliate
[inaudible]
and they pretty much keep doing that and stay even. So in other words,
it's a very robust program. It elicits cooperation.
If the opponent has any inclination to cooperate,
but it doesn't take any guff and it wins.
So you might say in evolutionary terms, this program is the fittest.
So actually axle rod played an evolutionary of his tournament. That is,
he has these programs after they played their tournament,
get a chance to reproduce copies of themselves according to how well they did.
You mean the winners would get to have more babies? Yeah.
And then with the babies play each other. Yeah, he ran them again.
I mean he ran them for many generations. And to sell it.
Like suppose you have a world of Lucifer's and there are a few tit for tat
players out there. Can they thrive?
Can cooperation emerge in this horribly hostile world? Oh,
an interesting question.
So he looked at that and the answer was if you have enough of them so that they
have enough chance of meeting each other and they can actually invade and take
over the world
[inaudible]
even if the world starts horribly mean
I mean what, what I take to be the big message though,
I mean what always sent chills down my spine,
just that we see this version of morality around the world,
you know, be upright, forgiving, but retaliatory.
I mean that sounds to me like the Old Testament. No,
it's not turning the other cheek. It's an eye for an eye,
but not 10 eyes for an eye.
And to think that it's not something that's handed down by our teachers or by
God, but that it's something that came from biology.
[inaudible]
I like that argument personally.
from biology. [inaudible]
now,
do we know whether the math has anything to do with real people in real life
situations or are we just abstracting behavior?
Is this wise or is this just math?
This is what's so impressive to me about Axel Rod's work,
so he's not just playing math games. He,
he tries to tie this to history and politics at scene.
I like to scan journals. One of my head would say it's past Angus.
It's part of my profession,
but I came across a book called the live and let live system in world war one.
So here's what we jump away from the math and the computer tournaments and into
something very real.
The war began late in July,
1914 that Stanley only one trail expert in World War One, Evan [inaudible],
professor of Meredith at Penn State, and a story that stands gonna help us tell.
It takes place on what was called the western front,
which was basically these two lines of trenches, very close to each other,
a few hundred yards apart and they stretched for a hundreds of miles and that
fall in November. The weather turned bed
heavy rains. Then it became IC
and then slush and then snow.
It became disgusting because the trenches also were filled with rats,
rats, the rats when after not only the food but after corpses,
and it was oddly in this miserable,
disgusting hell hole that something quite amazing happened.
No one quite knows how it started, but one day maybe around daybreak,
let's say while the two sides were fighting,
some of the British soldiers stopped firing
long enough to have breakfast
and as they were eating, they noticed, hmm, the German stop too,
to have their breakfast. When they were both done,
they'd begin firing again next morning. Same thing.
British take their breakfast break at about the same time.
The Germans do the same thing morning after that,
the same thing and then the next and after a while both
sides caught on. Now if they didn't interrupt the other one,
then they wouldn't be interrupted.
On the whole, there is silence.
This is from a letter a British soldier sent home to his wife at the time.
After all, if you prevent your enemy from drawing his rations,
his remedy is simple. He will prevent you from drawing yours.
When Axelrod read this,
I thought, gee, this sounds very familiar.
Line one, if tit for tat B, Nice first.
Now the Brits probably didn't mean to be nice first when they started the
breakfast truce, but it happened and then the Germans reciprocated,
which is line two.
Now keep in mind these two sides are at war and implicit in line two is a
threat. If you mess with me, I'm going to mess with you.
Well, think about snipers for example.
So there's letters where they a explained where the snipers would shoot at a
tree over and over and over again showing that in fact they were really
accurate, meaning that if they wanted to kill you, they'd get you.
And this was going on during the breakfast truce and these little agreements,
you know, like, I'm going to be nice to you, but I could kick your ass.
Don't forget.
Well these little truces spread all up and down the western front until things
really changed. Fast forward to December, Christmas Eve,
the climate was just about freezing on Christmas Eve and the Germans had a
tradition of a tabletop, Christmas trees,
small trees for weeks.
He said the German government had been shipping small trees literally to the
trenches, hundreds and hundreds of trees.
And that night on Christmas Eve at dusk,
the Germans began putting up their trees,
mounted them on the rim of their trench and lit candles on them singing
Christmas carols.
Uh,
the British who might've been no more than 50 or 70 yards away,
crawled forward and to no man's land to see better. And then they were spotted.
Here's a letter from a German soldier sent home to his family,
which describes what happened next.
I shouted to our enemies that we didn't wish to shoot.
I said we could speak to each other.
At first there was silence and then very slowly out of the darkness,
the British guys approached.
And so we came together and shook hands this to see,
this is where I start to think, ah, are you making this up?
Because this is where it starts to sound sort of crazy to me.
That's a pat Walters, our producer. Yeah,
sounds as if this is being made up and the result was for many decades people
assumed that this was just myth, couldn't possibly have happened,
but we know it had happened because we have the letters that the British and the
Germans sent back home. We know that they met in darkness and decided,
why don't we have a truce? In the morning?
Next morning, thousands of soldiers put down their rifles,
climbed out of their trenches into no man's land and started hanging out with
each other.
A lot of us went over and talked to them and this lasted the whole morning.
I talked to several of them,
I must say. They seemed extraordinarily fine. Men soldiers got together,
started fires, Cook Christmas dinners, swapped the presidents and drank.
The Germans, hauled out these enormous barrels of beer. They traded stuff,
cigars on trinkets,
even help one another buried the dead and in some places in the western front,
this period of goodwill lasted a whole week.
The generals found out
they were very angry about this. Cindy said,
if we didn't send you to the front too, to be nice to the other guys,
we sent him to kill him. If the general says, Hey,
I want you to shoot those Germans, that's an order,
well then they would wouldn't that, oh gee, sorry, general I missed,
but I'll try again better next time. I see where the general is fine.
They figured out how to disrupt this whole thing as they would said, okay,
you guys go out on a raid and I want you to bring back a prisoner or a corpse.
In other words,
show me a scalp that's an order and that messed things up or royally
[inaudible].
Here's a letter from a British soldier whose unit contained a band,
which was apparently pretty common.
He writes this letter about one of the moments when the truce vanished.
At six minutes to midnight, the band opened with the voc Tom Ryan,
which is a German patriotic anthem, so some of the Germans,
according to this letter,
climbed up onto the rim of their trench to listen to this English band playing
their song.
[inaudible].
Then there's the last note, sound [inaudible],
every grenade firing rifle,
trench mortar and bomb throwing machine let fly simultaneously into the German
trench.
So you can imagine the Germans that weren't killed would have felt betrayed.
They'd just been hanging out with these guys and the next night they would have
attacked back and the British would have attacked them back and then the Germans
would have retaliated against them and on and on and on.
Then it would kind of echo back and forth forever. And that's what happened.
There were immense casualties, uh, uh,
as many as 50,000 casualties in a day.
And this says Axelrod is where you see sort of the dark side of different tech.
What are the weaknesses of the tit for tat strategy?
Or one of the problems with it is these echoes,
not just that cause of good obviously, but echos of violence could get bad.
So what I found though was that instead of playing pure tit for tat,
where you always defect at the other guy defects,
there are certain circumstances. He, and this I find completely
fascinating where you want to modify that second line of code so that you're not
always retaliating. You're nearly always retaliating, right?
If you were a little bit generous,
which by which I mean say 10% of the time you don't effect,
then what happens is that these echoes will stop and I would call that generous
tit for tat.
So this is kind of interesting like we started with Moses, you know,
eye for an eye. But here it's saying maybe for every nine parts, Moses,
you need one part. Jesus. You know what?
Meaning like turning the other turn the other cheek.
It sounds like you've described like a cooking recipe or something like nine
parts once. Yeah, I mean if you abstracted it as kind of a recipe,
it's a recipe for life,
but it isn't the recipe that ignores the deep fact of it. Look,
if I were punching you in the face right now, what are you going to do?
I'm going to punch you back and I'm going to punch you back.
You Punch me back on Toback and we're in pain and somehow in the middle of being
blasted by my powerful fish, you have to come up with the moral courage is,
I think I'm going to kiss this guy now, and that is not he as you well know,
that is not an easy thing to do. All right? But you make it an all personal.
My point is if you zoom out,
this is a strategy that just seems to be woven into the fabric of the cosmos.
It works for computers, it works for people. It probably works for Amoeba. Okay.
It just works. And you think that exists on some higher plane? I do. I do.
I don't. I think this is still, as you just called it, very personal.
I think a person has to choose to be kind.
I am gonna make that choice right now then. Okay, you're irritating me.
I'm going to say to you, Robert, you look very nice today.
You know what I'm going to do?